---
title: "Autonomous measurements of an undisturbed epipelagic sound scattering layer at high latitudes"
collection: talks
type: "Conference Presentation"
permalink: /talks/OSM_2022
venue: "Arctic Science Summit Week 2021 (Online)"
date: 2021-03-19
location: "Lisbon, Portugal"

---

In Session: Emerging technologies and their applications in the Arctic

Autonomous measurements of an undisturbed epipelagic sound scattering layer at high latitudes

Muriel Dunn, Fisheries and Marine Institute at Memorial University of Newfoundland and Akvaplan-niva, Tromsø, Norway
Geir Pedersen, Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway
Sünnje Basedow, UiT - The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
Stig Falk-Petersen, Akvaplan-niva, Tromsø, Norway
Lionel Camus, Akvaplan-niva, Oslo, Norway
Maxime Geoffroy, Fisheries and Marine Institute at Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John’s, NL


Sound scattering layers (SSL) form horizontal layers with high abundance of zooplankton and small fish throughout all oceans. However, describing the composition and migrations within these layers is challenging, especially near the surface. To document the Norwegian Sea's epipelagic SSLs, we conducted hydroacoustic-trawl surveys at Tromsøflaket (70˚N) in June 2018. The vessel's narrowband echosounders (18 and 38 kHz) detected a strong epipelagic SSL dominated by Calanus species between 12.5 and 40 m. However, the hull-mounted echosounder's 12.5 m blind zone prevents from confirming if the SSL extended up to the surface. Also, the avoidance from vessel noise and sampling gear might have biased the distribution and abundance estimates. An autonomous surface vehicle (ASV-Sailbuoy) equipped with a broadband echosounder (283-383 kHz) was also deployed in the same region. We utilized the advantages from ASVs, such as reduced blind zone (2.5 m) and reduced disturbance, and broadband echosounders. Based on these data with high range resolution and frequency response of targets across a broad spectrum, we predict density estimates of functional groups in the epipelagic SSL. These predictions are calculated using sound scattering models and machine learning optimization routines. Here, we discuss the advantages, limitations and challenges we face with this approach and its applicability to increase the temporal and spatial coverage of acoustic surveys conducted at high latitudes.